---
layout: single
title:  "[REview] MCB80.1x.01 - "
categories:
  - NeuroScience
---

We need to know about some electronic terms to understand bioelectricity, 
which plays a central role in the function of the nervous system.
Voltage can be said to be the difference in electrical potential between two points.
Most of us already know its SI unit, volts(**V**), 
as there are so many places and things around us that use electricity.

One simple thing we need to know:  
Positive(**+**) charges will move towards lower electrical potential, 
while negative(**-**) charges will move towards higher electrical potential.

(전하 이동하는 사진)

Ions, which are positively or negatively charged, make the potential difference between the inside and the outside of the cell.
Ions can only move in and out of the cell with the help of channels or pumps in the membrane.
The impermeability of the membrane helps maintain the voltage across the membrane.

(세포막에 채널, 이온 있는 사진)

Voltage is a relative measurement.
We mostly use the  as the reference point, but in neuroscience we use the outside of the cell as the 'ground'.
For example, if the inside of the cell is 15mV more positive than the outside of the cell, 
the voltage can be said as +15mV.

(예시 사진 있으먄)

The typical neuron
Soma: houses the cell's neucleus and a variety of cellular machinery
axons, dendrites
cell membrane: the outer surface of all these parts is made up of a bilayer of lipid molecules that partition the inside and outsied

we will focus on some small part of the soma from now on
we can measure the membrane potential, and this can vary very widely.
even at rest, the membrane potential is not zero; the resting potential is measured around -60~-70mV
There are many many kinds of materials floating around the water covering both the inside and outside of the cell
There are about four important things to concentrate on: K+, Na+, Ca2+, Cl-

(전위차 사진)
(이온 분포 표?사진?)

We know about electrostatic force: same charges repel each other, while different charges attract each other
that is the basic concept
WE need to know about diffusion, which can be easily witnessed as colors spreading through water 
when we drop some dye into it
Diffusion is a stochastic process, a random walk of particles bumping into each other.
But as we can easily derive from the example above, diffusion causes the particles to move from regions
of high concentration to lower ones

Electrostatic force, and diffusion both perform in the movement of ions surrounding the membrane
Let's just think about one kind of ion, potassium first
We have said above that the ions can only move in and out of the membrane via channels 
that allow only specific substances to flow.
------------------------------
For example, if the concentration of K+ is higher on the inside and the K+ channel is open,
K+ will start to diffuse from inside to the outside of the neuron.
And then, because each side of the membrane is basically electroneutral at the start,

We can think at first that in the end, the K+ concentration on both sides will become the same at equilibrium
But here's the catch: 
